Friday May 2, 2014
==================

I think I've finally emerged. I couldn't have done it alone this time; it took the help of several friends. Optimism seems to only lead back to a pressure, or maybe a fear, that I'm not actually done. That drive for some kind of perfection is what keeps me in the tunnel, and the obsession keeps me there alone. This is what sharpens the edge of the abyss to a razor point, requiring an unsustainable effort to remain balanced. But now, as far as I can tell, my work does form a complete whole. It makes sense now. I've left the tunnel, and my art is complete.

I can never be sure how completion interacts with causality in tunnels. Maybe I'm out now because I finished, or maybe the art and the tunnel could only simultaneously collapse when I became absolutely certain I couldn't go any deeper without killing myself. Every time this happens, I find myself far past the point where a healthy, balanced person would have stopped for self care. I forget to eat, I stop answering email, I avoid my friends, I become addicted to my work, and I misplace each individual thread connecting me back to the rest of the world. Of course, these are the connections that give art any point whatsoever. I suspect I would dig myself free upon sensing the encroaching irrelevance, if I weren't already too mired in depression to care by that point.

When I first developed the idea for Ecstatic Epiphany as an abstract narrative, it was already self-referential. To me, it's always been about the meta-narrative of creativity and inspiration. Sinking deeper into the tunnel, inspiration from my life and my other works faded, ouroboros took its place. In the very middle of this self-reflexive narrative, I created a depression tunnel in my art. Swirling masses of light and dark on a murky background blend together spectacularly before all light is extinguished into an unknowably deep black hole.

I soldered, glued, wrote code, debugged computer vision algorithms, anything I could do that allowed me to continue focusing on the project while I put off writing the second half of the narrative. Friends would tell me Ecstatic Epiphany seemed complete. I didn't know how to explain why it felt so unfinished to me. I didn't know how to tell anyone I was stuck in the darkness that exists just barely beyond the most beautiful things.

I don't know if I can do this again, but it feels so necessary. The lonely inward spiral of depression seems inseparable from the extreme productivity I rely on for my work. It's a pattern that can seem normal or even exalted in the collective mythology of engineering culture I've been steeping myself in for decades. You just build an epic thing, trust your instincts, it'll be great. People will love it, you think, even as you haven't talked to anyone in weeks.

When I broke this tunnel, the Ecstatic Epiphany finally collapsed and I discovered its additional layer of meaning. Now it feels like the superposition of inspiration and destruction. It is energy for inspiration. It is that same energy that has the potential to build your future, or to destroy your will.

The inward spiral of depression isn't the midpoint of the narrative, it's near the end. After the unknowably deep hole, a chance emerges, and participants at this point actually have more agency over the piece here than at any other point. Here you have the power to create something nourishing, sustainable, and just as beautiful as before.

That is how this piece came to be about mental health for me. Creativity, technology, culture, inspiration, chaos, patterns, and that demon inside us all that leaves sparks of beauty among the ruins.
